API spec review: UserActivityHistory (#5260)
microsoft/WindowsAppSDK: specs/UserActivityHistory/UserActivityHistoryAPI.md

UserActivityHistory
===

# Background

> The UserActivity class can be used to note down and preserve a record of activities that the user

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [UserActivity](https://learn.microsoft.com/uwp/api/windows.applicationmodel.useractivities.useractivity
) class can be used to record activities that the user
```

is currently doing on their computer - e.g., browsing a website, reading a Word document, etc.

> 

Reviewer: "This allows Windows to have insight into the application state, enabling smart experiences that are built around the semantics of the app. For example, a document editor can give Windows information about the document that the user is editing, so that Recall can later take the user to the document at the same location."

> To record user activity, you use UserActivityChannel to retrieve a UserActivity object via the

Reviewer: nit, change "you" to "an app"

> To record user activity, you use UserActivityChannel to retrieve a UserActivity object via the

Reviewer: Conceptual Pages section?

Author: I wasn't sure if this needed one, given that the template said it was optional, but I can add one.

API GetOrCreateUserActivityAsync. If a UserActivity with the given ID already exists, it will be
returned; otherwise, a new UserActivity object will be created and returned. You can then call
the API GetSession to return a UserActivitySession object that tracks how long the user is engaged
in that activity. This structure allows multiple sessions to be associated with the same activity,
representing the case where the user completes that activity a bit at a time - e.g., beginning to
watch a movie, then pausing, then watching more later. These will be treated as the same singular
user activity that spans multiple sessions.

> UserActivityHistory is a new set of APIs that allow you to query the past 28 days of the user's

Reviewer: 28 days --> is this a parameter of how the history is stored? e.g. can I say how long to keep this for? (maybe with a system-defined upper limit)?

Author: 28 days is an arbitrarily-defined length of time that seemed like an amount that would allow users to accomplish everything they want to do without storing more than would be required.  There isn't anything in the current design that would allow users to set it to a different amount, though if we wanted to add something to settings, there also isn't anything that would prevent us from doing that.

I can add an "up to" comment to cover the possibility of us adding a setting later.

> UserActivityHistory is a new set of APIs that allow you to query the past 28 days of the user's

Reviewer: - can any app query any other app's UserActivity?
- can any apps call this api or is there some sort of capability?

Author: Oh, good point, I forgot to include a discussion on this.  An app can query any user activity that has been recorded on the same computer for the same user, but only if a) the user grants permission to access user activity history via a consent dialog, and b) the app is Microsoft logo certified, which basically means that we know what the app is and have given it the OK.  A random exe downloaded off the internet will not be able to access this data.

activity history, which will enable you to bring back content that the user has previously been
interacting with.

# API Pages

## UserActivityHistory class

This class provides static methods that enable you to query the user's activity history.
This activity history is stored in a database managed by a local service, and these APIs
call out to that service to retrieve data from the database.

Here is an example usage of the class that will enable you to bring back the webpage for a
Korean recipe that the user had previously interacted with within the last day:

```c#
UserActivityHistoryQuery query = new();

> query.Keywords = new string[] { "Korean", "recipe" };

Reviewer: can I just pass "Korean recipe" instead? what is the criteria for choosing to wordbreak or not?

Author: "Korean recipe" would match those exact words in that order with the space in the middle.  Passing in the two separately will match any display text containing "Korean" and "recipe".  So "A recipe for Korean food", "A Korean bibimbap recipe" would match "Korean" and "recipe", but would not match "Korean recipe".

query.LatestStartTime = DateTime.Now.AddDays(-1);

> IList<UserActivityHistoryItem> results = await UserActivityHistory.SearchAsync(

Reviewer: this says SearchAsync but below says Search?

Author: Search and SearchAsync are both part of the API spec.  One is just an async version of the other, for convenience.  I can change this to use the sync version of the API if that creates confusion, though.

    new UserActivityHistoryQuery[] { query },
    UserActivityHistoryOrderBy.DwellTime,
    maxResults: 1);

UserActivityHistoryItem item = results.FirstOrDefault();

if (item != null)
{
    // Now we can use item.ActivationUri to bring back the webpage in the state in which the user
    // was last viewing it.
}
```

## UserActivityHistory.Search method

This method synchronously queries the user's activity history and returns a list of items matching
the criteria specified in the `queries` parameter. The results are ordered in descending order
according by the `orderBy` parameter: either by the most recent start times, the most recent
end times, or the longest time spent on the activity.

> Each parameter in `queries` is ORed together in the resulting database query, whereas the contents

Reviewer: I think the db is an implementation detail so I'd recommend focusing more on "can I just enter a full natural language sentence, or just keywords"? 
For example, if the API took a single NL string, then the system could extract keywords from it, and then do the lookup in the database with those keywords as an implementation detail.

Author: I've updated the spec to ignore the existence of the database in lieu of just talking about behavior.  NL processing is out of scope for this API - it's expected that the app will perform that and will then pass the result into this API.

> of a single object in the `queries` array are ANDed together.  For example, if you provided two

Reviewer: I think we need a paragraph (and sample) before this that describes content type, because without it this sentence is hard to follow.

Author: Good point, I'll add an explanation.

queries, each of which contained the keywords "tax", one of which had a content type of
"application/pdf" and the other had a content type of "image/*", the resulting database query
would be something along these lines:

```sql
SELECT * FROM UserActivityHistory WHERE
    (CONTAINS (DisplayText, '"tax"')) AND
    ((CONTAINS (ContentType, '"application/pdf"')) OR
     (CONTAINS (ContentType, '"image/*"')));
```

## UserActivityHistory.SearchAsync method

> This method is an asynchronous version of the `Search` method.

Reviewer: do we even need this? apps can just spin up a thread, call the sync version and wait for that.

Reviewer: here and others -- if we don't have a good reason for async versions, consider removing.

## UserActivityHistory.GetAppsWithUserActivity method

This method synchronously retrieves a list of all the app names with data in the user's activity
history database. You can use this, for example, to show the user the list of apps that are being
queried against, so the user can understand why an app that is not recording user activity is not

> showing up in the results.

Reviewer: shouldn't there be a way to get the list of apps for a particular content type? for example if I want to search for documents, it doesn't help me to know that my music player has 20'000 songs added to my user history.

Author: You could do that with the Search API - e.g., if you want to find all apps interacting with PNG images, you could do something like

```c#
UserActivityHistoryQuery query = new();
query.ContentType = "image/png";

IList<UserActivityHistoryItem> imageActivity = UserActivityHistory.Search(
    new UserActivityHistoryQuery[] { query },
    UserActivityHistoryOrderBy.DwellTime,
    maxResults: 50);

List<string> appNames = imageActivity.Select(item => item.AppName).Distinct().ToList();
```

The intention for this API is to be able to allow users to see that an app they might have been expecting to be searched (e.g. Adobe Photoshop, perhaps) is not actually reporting user activity.

## UserActivityHistory.GetAppsWithUserActivityAsync method

This method is an asynchronous version of the `GetAppsWithUserActivity` method.

## UserActivityHistoryItem class

This class represents a single item in the user's activity history. It contains properties that

> describe in what app the activity occurred, what the nature of the activity was, the URI of the

Reviewer: can you clarify what you mean by "nature of the activity"?

Author: Updated to explicitly call out what's in a user activity object.

resource involved in the activity (e.g., a document, a webpage, a video, etc.), the URI that
can be used to bring back the state the user left the activity in, and the times when the user

> started the activity and ended the activity.

Reviewer: nit, "started and ended the activity"

If the user performed the same activity multiple times, there will be multiple
`UserActivityHistoryItem` objects returned, each with different start and end times.

## UserActivityHistoryItem.AppName property

> This property contains the name of the app in which the activity occurred.

Reviewer: what kind of name is this? a PFN? an AUMID? display name? exe path?
Is this something Windows infers from the caller, or the app provided this when recording the UserActivity?

Author: My current implementation contains the exe path, but it would be even better if there were a way to get the display name.  I can't immediately find one.  We have to infer this from the caller; the UserActivity object does not have this property anywhere.

Reviewer: we can use CallerIdentity or similar (e.g. CoGetCallContext) to get an AUMID. When an app receives this AUMID they can find the display name of that AUMID for display purposes. We could choose to store the display name too, because the app might get uninstalled sometime after capturing the user activity and before querying it (what happens with that app's user activity history, does it get deleted?)

In any case let's take an action item to update the wording here once we have a solid caller id implementation

Reviewer 2: >My current implementation contains the exe path

Is this an unpackaged app or packaged?

If packaged you'll want to record the package full name. Given that you can lookup its DisplayName (and Logo) localized for the current user to view.

Is this _historical_? Does UserActivityHistory retain information recorded by apps after they're uninstalled? If so then you can't guarantee looking up the DisplayName. If so there are options but they have caveats so I'll wait to hear if relevant before saying more.

>but it would be even better if there were a way to get the display name

```
p = packageManager.FindPackageForUser("", pkgfullname)
string displayName = p.DisplayName
```

returns the package's DisplayName localized for the calling user. Are there cases where the package isn't registered for the calling user?

## UserActivityHistoryItem.ActivityId property

This property contains the ID of the activity, which can be used to collate multiple sessions
of the same activity. For example, if the user watched a movie in multiple sessions, the
`ActivityId` property can be used to identify how long in total the user spent watching that movie.

## UserActivityHistoryItem.DisplayText property

This property contains a string that is how the app chose to describe the activity. For example,
if the activity was reading the contents of a webpage, this property might contain the webpage's title.

## UserActivityHistoryItem.ContentType property

This property contains the MIME type of the content being interacted with. For example, if the user

> was looking at a PNG image, this property would contain the string "image/png".

Reviewer: is this be "anything the app gave Windows", or "one from a list of known MIME types"?
e.g. can Contoso say "contoso/bloop"?

Author: It's a string property, so it can be anything.  I can make that clear in the description.

## UserActivityHistoryItem.ContentUri property

This property contains the URI of the content being interacted with. For example, if the user was

> looking at a webpage, this property would contain the URI of that webpage.

Reviewer: what happens if the content is not URI backed?
For example, you were creating a new doc -- autosave was off so no URI. Or, the app generated an image with stable diffusion. Is it a requirement that all UserActivity content can be referenced via URI?
And also I'm assuming that if the content goes away, we don't necessarily know about it?

Author: The primary purpose of this API is to be able to retrieve something that the user was previously working with, so if there isn't an ActivationUri populated, then we won't add that UserActivity to the database.

Author: I'll add a comment to that end.

## UserActivityHistoryItem.ActivationUri property

This property contains the URI that can be used to bring back the state the user left the activity in.
For example, if the user was looking at a webpage, this property would contain the URI of that webpage

> with additional information such as what page the user was on, what their scroll position was, etc.

Reviewer: what page the user was on --> that's the content uri already, no?

Author: Probably, yeah.  I'll remove that.

## UserActivityHistoryItem.StartTime property

This property contains the time when the user started the activity session.

## UserActivityHistoryItem.EndTime property

> This property contains the time when the user ended the activity session.

Reviewer: can a UA exist with a start and no end?

Author: No - we save a UserActivity when a session for it ends, and it won't have ended without having previously started.

## UserActivityHistoryQuery class

This class is used to specify criteria for what portion of the user's activity history you want to
retrieve. It allows you to specify keywords to search for, content types to filter by, and time ranges
to filter by.

## UserActivityHistoryQuery.Keywords property

> This property is an array of keywords, each of which is used to lexically search against the

Reviewer: there is no semantic search? If there's a misspelling or alternate spelling of a keyword, the system won't find it?
e.g. en-US "vacation", en-UK "holiday"

Author: Correct - we're expecting that the app will have done the heavy lifting of semantic parsing, etc.  The specific scenario we're picturing for this API is an agentic AI app that will construct the parameters to pass into this API.

We certainly might be able to add semantic search later, but that is currently not in scope for this API.

Reviewer: thanks! that's fine for a v1, but tagging @andrewleader to consider this as an improvement

DisplayText column in the database. Keywords are case-insensitive, and results returned will

> be those that contain all of the keywords in the array.

Reviewer: I think this means apps are incentivized to ask for the least number of keywords, which seems counterintuitive?

Author: Not necessarily - if you want to search for keyword A or keyword B, you can pass in two separate queries.  The motivation behind requiring that we match all of the keywords is to make it so that you can be more specific.  For example, you can search for both "Korean" and "recipe" to avoid getting, for example, a webpage you visited on Korean history.

## UserActivityHistoryQuery.ContentType property

> 

Reviewer: can the asterisk appear anywhere or only as the value of the subtype?

Author: Anywhere.

This property is a string that specifies the content type associated with the activity you want
to retrieve. It allows the inclusion of an asterisk as a wildcard - e.g., "image/*" will match
all content types beginning with "image/", such as "image/png", "image/jpeg", etc.
This property is case-insensitive.

## UserActivityHistoryQuery.EarliestStartTime property

> This is a nullable DateTime property that specifies the earliest start time of the activity

Reviewer: conceptually, nullable -> optional

Reviewer: here and below

Author: Changed.

| Name | Description |
|-|-|
| StartTime | Results will be in descending order of their StartTime property |
| EndTime | Results will be in descending order of their EndTime property |
| DwellTime | Results will be in descending order of the difference between their EndTime and StartTime properties |

# API Details

```c# (but really MIDL3)
namespace Microsoft.Windows.ApplicationModel.UserActivities
{
    runtimeclass UserActivityHistory
    {
        static IVector<UserActivityHistoryItem> Search(
            UserActivityHistoryQuery[] queries,
            UserActivityHistoryOrderBy orderBy,
            UInt32 maxResults); 

        static IAsyncOperation<IVector<UserActivityHistoryItem> > SearchAsync( 
            UserActivityHistoryQuery[] queries, 
            UserActivityHistoryOrderBy orderBy, 
            UInt32 maxResults);

        static IVector<String> GetAppsWithUserActivity();

        static IAsyncOperation<IVector<String>> GetAppsWithUserActivityAsync();
    }

    runtimeclass UserActivityHistoryItem
    {
        String AppName { get; };
        String ActivityId { get; };
        String DisplayText { get; };
        String ContentType { get; };

>         String ContentUri { get; };

Reviewer: what can the app do with this though? in general this won't be useful to apps other than the originator of this content, unless it's public, due to needing to authenticate.

Author: As long as the resource is something that can be accessed via a URI, e.g. a webpage, a document, etc., that URI can be used to bring it up to the user, which is the primary idea behind this API.

earlier today", your app might have an agentic AI parse that input and determine that the user is looking
for a webpage that contains the keywords "Korean" and "recipe", and construct a query with those keywords,
a content type of "text/html", and an access time within the last 24 hours.

In order for an app to make use of this API, it must be Windows logo certified, and the user must provide
their consent to allow access to their activity history.  If either of these is not the case, the API will
throw an exception.

# API Pages

## UserActivityHistory class

This class provides static methods that enable you to query the user's activity history.
This activity history is stored in a database managed by a local service, and these APIs
call out to that service to retrieve data from the database.

Here is an example usage of the class that will enable you to bring back the webpage for a
Korean recipe that the user had previously interacted with within the last day:

```c#
UserActivityHistoryQuery query = new();
query.Keywords = new string[] { "Korean", "recipe" };
query.LatestStartTime = DateTime.Now.AddDays(-1);

IList<UserActivityHistoryItem> results = UserActivityHistory.Search(

>     new UserActivityHistoryQuery[] { query },

Reviewer 2: RECOMMEND: Add an overload for 1 query

    UserActivityHistoryOrderBy.DwellTime,
    maxResults: 1);

UserActivityHistoryItem item = results.FirstOrDefault();

> 

Reviewer 2: RECOMMEND: Remove blank line

performed on the keywords in the query, which will match if all of the keywords are found somewhere
in the DisplayText property of the item.

This method will not perform any parsing of the keywords for semantic meaning or natural language -
it is expected that the app will have already performed that step and will pass the result of that
into this API.

A case-insensitive lexical search will also be performed on the ContentType property of the item,
which is the [MIME type](https://docs.w3cub.com/http/basics_of_http/mime_types/complete_list_of_mime_types.html)
of the resource the user was interacting with.  The search will match if the ContentType of the item matches
the ContentType property of the query.  The ContentType supports using an asterisk as a wildcard
to match a range of content types - e.g., "image/*" will match "image/png", "image/jpeg", etc.

## UserActivityHistory.GetAppsWithUserActivity method

This method synchronously retrieves a list of all the app names with data in the user's activity
history database. You can use this, for example, to show the user the list of apps that are being

> queried against, so the user can understand why an app that is not recording user activity is not

Reviewer 2: >...why an app not recording isn't showing up in the list of apps that recorded...

Typo? Should be "...what an app <strike>that is not</strike> recording user activity is not showing up..." ?

If this property is unspecified, it will be ignored.

## UserActivityHistoryQuery.LatestStartTime property

This is an optional DateTime property that specifies the latest start time of the activity
you want to retrieve. Any activities with a StartTime property later than this will be excluded.
If this property is unspecified, it will be ignored.

## UserActivityHistoryQuery.LatestEndTime property

This is an optional DateTime property that specifies the latest end time of the activity
you want to retrieve. Any activities with an EndTime property later than this will be excluded.
If this property is unspecified, it will be ignored.

## UserActivityHistoryOrderBy enum

This enum specifies what property the results should be ordered by.  The options are as follows:

| Name | Description |
|-|-|
| StartTime | Results will be in descending order of their StartTime property |
| EndTime | Results will be in descending order of their EndTime property |
| DwellTime | Results will be in descending order of the difference between their EndTime and StartTime properties |

# API Details

```c# (but really MIDL3)

> namespace Microsoft.Windows.ApplicationModel.UserActivities

Reviewer 2: Beat me to it.

`Microsoft.Windows.AI.UserActivities` seems more apt

{
    runtimeclass UserActivityHistory
    {
        static IVector<UserActivityHistoryItem> Search(
            UserActivityHistoryQuery[] queries,
            UserActivityHistoryOrderBy orderBy,

>             UInt32 maxResults); 

Reviewer 3: Is there a material benefit to passing maxResults (e.g. perf? or making the user feel better if we include this as part of the consent prompt?).

        static IAsyncOperation<IVector<UserActivityHistoryItem> > SearchAsync( 
            UserActivityHistoryQuery[] queries, 
            UserActivityHistoryOrderBy orderBy, 
            UInt32 maxResults);

>         static IVector<String> GetAppsWithUserActivity();

Reviewer 3: Should this be a list of ProductIds rather than just strings? What data do we have from unpackaged apps recording activities (like Office)?

        static IAsyncOperation<IVector<String>> GetAppsWithUserActivityAsync();
    }

    runtimeclass UserActivityHistoryItem
    {

>         String AppName { get; };

Reviewer 2: What is `AppName`?

If a packaged app is this the app's AUMID (programmatic id) or DisplayName (localized string for human consumption)?

Does this API support unpackaged apps?

that activity a bit at a time - e.g., beginning to watch a movie, then pausing, then watching more later.
These will be treated as the same singular user activity that spans multiple sessions.

UserActivityHistory is a new set of APIs that allow you to query up to the past 28 days of the
user's activity history, which will enable you to bring back content that the user has previously
been interacting with.

# Conceptual pages (How To)

The intended use case of this API is to allow you to make search queries against the user's activity history
on their local computer.  The string matching in the query parameters in this API is lexical in nature,
meaning that it is expected that any natural language semantic parsing of the user's input will be done by
your app prior to calling this API.

For example, if a user types in something along the lines of, "Please find the Korean recipe I was looking at
earlier today", your app might have an agentic AI parse that input and determine that the user is looking
for a webpage that contains the keywords "Korean" and "recipe", and construct a query with those keywords,
a content type of "text/html", and an access time within the last 24 hours.

> In order for an app to make use of this API, it must be Windows logo certified, and the user must provide

Reviewer: link to "how do I get the Windows logo certification" page?

Reviewer 3: Also, need to take into account whatever consent model we end up with - one time, every time, does it include context, etc?
